>>> ON THIS EDITION FOR SATURDAY
NOVEMBER 30th, A NEW DEADLIN
FOR HEALTH.GOV AFTER A PROMISE
TO BE BETTER THAN EVER
>> IF A MILLION PEOPLE OR
MILLION SHOW UP CLOSE TO THE
DEADLINE, IT COULD BRING THE
>> THIS TOWN COULD BE GROUND
ZERO FOR CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> IT'S DEFINITELY CHANGING
LOT.
IT'S HARD TO SAY IF OUR YOUNGE
GENERATIONS WILL BE ABLE TO DO
WHAT WE ARE ABLE TO DO
>> ESCALATING TENSIONS BETWEEN
CHINA AND JAPAN AND THE UNITED
STATES
>> IF THERE ARE FIGHTER JETS I
THE AIR AND DOGGING EACH OTHER
COULD BE A MISTAKE
THAT'S WHAT U.S. AND JAPAN ARE
PARTICULARLY CONCERNED ABOUT
>> NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
>>> "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND" I
FROM THE TISH WNET STUDIOS I
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK
HARI SREENIVASAN
>>> THE WEBSITE HEALTH.GOV WAS
TAKEN DOWN FOR REPAIRS AND WIL
BE DOWN AGAIN FOR WHAT I
DESCRIBED AS ROUTINE MAINTENANCE
1:00 A.M. TO 5:00 A.M. EASTERN
TIME TOMORROW.
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS HOP
THE WILL BE ABLE TO SERVICE AS
MANY AS 50,000 AMERICANS A
ONCE
THEIR GOAL TO SIGN UP MORE THA
7 MILLION PEOPLE BY MARCH.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IT'S ODD FOR ME TO BE ASKING FOR
A WEBSITE UPDATE, BUT HOW IS I
DOING?
BETTER THAN THOSE PROBLEMS W
HEARD ABOUT?
>> Reporter: IT'S BETTER THA
OCTOBER 1st, THAT'S FOR SURE
THAT DOESN'T NECESSARILY SAY TOO
MUCH BECAUSE IF YOU REMEMBER
OCTOBER 1st, PEOPLE WERE LOGGING
OUT AND COULDN'T GET PAST TH
HOME PAGE THEY HAVE SLOWLY BEE
MAKING PROGRESS.
AS OF LATE LAST WEEK, MYSELF AND
MY COLLEAGUES WE OUT TALKING T
CONSUMERS, TALKING TO INSURANC
BROKERS, TALKING TO NONPROFITS
TRYING TO SIGN PEOPLE UP
SAYING THIS WEBSITE IS STILL I
SOME PRETTY ROUGH SHAPE A COUPLE
OF PEOPLE GAVE IT 4-10 AS FAR AS
HOW IS IT FUNCTIONING, 10 BEIN
THE BEST
ONE OF THE PROBLEMS WE ARE
HEARING ABOUT MOST FROM PEOPLE
THE SITE IMPROVED TO THE POINT
WHERE YOU CAN GET TO THE LAS
STEP
YOU CAN CREATE AN ACCOUNT, YOU
CAN SHOP AROUND FOR PLANS, FIN
IF YOU GET A TAX SUBSIDY
WHEN YOU GET TO THAT POINT WHERE
OKAY, I'M READY TO BUY INSURANCE
WHICH IS THE WHOLE POINT OF THIS
WEBSITE, THAT'S WHERE IT LOCKS
UP
THAT'S WHERE IT BREAKS DOWN.
ONLY A TRICKLE OF PEOPLE ARE
ACTUALLY BEING ABLE TO BUY A
INSURANCE PLAN
THEN THERE IS ANOTHER ISSUE ON
THE BACK END THAT WE ARE HEARING
FROM INSURERS TELLING US THA
THE DATA FROM THIS WEBSITE I
NOT BEING TRANSMITTED TO THE
WELL
THEY'RE NOT GETTING ACCURATE
INFORMATION ABOUT WHO IS SIGNING
UP
PEOPLE ARE SIGNING UP FO
INSURANCE AND NOT SURE IF TH
INSURERS ARE GETTING THA
INFORMATION.
THERE ARE A LOT OF FUNDAMENTAL
ISSUES GOING ON WITH THIS SITE
THE ADMINISTRATION SAYS OVER THE
WEEKEND THEY ARE STILL WORKING
TRYING TO WORK THESE OUT
THOSE ON THE FRONT LINES O
SIGNING PEOPLE UP, THEY AR
STILL QUITE SKEPTICAL AT THI
POINT.
>> ONE REASON IS THIS IS ALMOS
A PROXY FOR THE EFFICACY OF TH
LAW THAT PEOPLE ARE LOOKING AT
THIS SO CLOSELY.
BEST-CASE SCENARIO
TOMORROW AT THE DEADLINE I
LAUNCHES, EVERYTHING IS -- DOE
THE MATH ADD UP?
CAN THEY GET TO 7 MILLION BY
MARCH?
>> AND HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE GOING
TO ALL FLOOD ON AT ONE TIME?
SO, YES, THEORETICALLY BY TH
END OF MARCH 31st, THAT'S WHEN
YOU HAVE TO SIGN UP IN ORDER T
COMPLY WITH THIS MANDATE AND NOT
PAY A PENALTY, THEY SHOULD B
ABLE TO GET ENOUGH PEOPLE TO
SIGN UP.
THE CONCERN IS THAT YOUR SHO
AND OTHER SHOWS ARE GOING TO B
TALKING ABOUT HOW TH
ADMINISTRATION PLANS TO HAVE
THIS WEBSITE FUNCTIONING MUC
BETTER COME DECEMBER 1st
A MILLION PEOPLE ARE GOING T
SHOW UP THAT DAY AND IT'S GOIN
TO CRASH THE SITE AGAIN.
SO RIGHT NOW THEY'VE GOTTEN IT
TO A POINT WHERE ABOUT 50,00
PEOPLE CAN COME ON AT ONE TIME
IT CAN HANDLE ABOUT 80,000
PEOPLE A DAY
NOW, IF A MILLION PEOPLE OR
MILLION PEOPLE SHOW UP ON ON
DAY OR SHOW UP CLOSE TO TH
DEADLINE, IT COULD BRING THE
WHOLE SITE DOWN AGAIN.
THAT'S A CONCERN
>> WE SHOULD REMIND PEOPLE THI
IS IN THE 36 STATES AND ONLINE
IS ONLY ONE WAY TO DO IT
>> RIGHT
THE 36 STATES IS IMPORTANT, TOO.
IF YOU'RE IN THOSE 14 STATES
THAT BUILT THEIR OWN EXCHANGE,
NEW YORK, CALIFORNIA, YOU MIGH
BE WATCHING THIS SAYING, WHA
ARE YOU TALKING ABOUT PROBLEMS
SIGNING UP ON THE WEBSITE?
I SIGNED UP FINE
IN THOSE STATES TENS O
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE HAVE BEE
ABLE TO ENROLL
IT'S FEDERAL HEALTH.GOV THAT'S
HAVING THE ISSUES.
>> YOU CAN CALL AND GO TO
CENTER
>> YES
A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE BEE
FILLING OUT THESE PAPE
APPLICATIONS THAT THE NONPROFI
GROUPS PEOPLE ARE GOING TO, THEY
GIVE THEM A PAPER APPLICATIO
AND SEND IT IN
THAT COULD TAKE A COUPLE O
MONTHS TO PROCESS.
THERE IS A CONCERN ABOUT HOW
EFFICIENT THAT IS, AS WELL
>> SHANNON, THANKS SO MUCH
>>> CHRISTMAS SHOPPING SEASO
HAS BEGUN.
THE NATIONAL RETAIL FEDERATION
ESTIMATES THAT PERHAPS IN EXCESS
OF 30 MILLION SHOPPERS ACTUALL
DID THEIR SHOPPING O
THANKSGIVING DAY THIS YEAR
MEANWHILE, ACCORDING TO A SURVEY
OF E COMMERCE SITES, BLACK
FRIDAY ONLINE SALES WERE UP 20
THIS YEAR COMPARED TO LAST, WITH
SMART PHONES MAKING UP
ALMOST 1/4 OF ALL ONLINE
COMMERCE TRAFFIC
PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF HIS
FAMILY WENT SHOPPING TODAY AT
BOOK STORE IN THE NATION'S
CAPITAL AS THEY'VE DONE IN YEARS
PAST TO MARK SMALL BUSINES
SATURDAY
A DAY SET ASIDE TO ENCOURAGE
SHOPPING AT TRADITIONAL MOM AN
POP STORES
>>> NORTH KOREA'S STATE MEDI
BROADCAST VIDEO OF WHAT IT SAY
WAS A CONFESSION TO WAR CRIMES
AGAINST CIVILIANS BY A
85-YEAR-OLD KOREAN WAR VETERAN
DETAINED IN LATE OCTOBER
MERRILL NEWMAN, A RETIRE
FINANCE EXECUTIVE WAS TAKEN OF
AN AIRPLANE AS HE PLANNED TO
LEAVE THAT COUNTRY AFTER A
TEN-DAY TOUR
HE REPORTEDLY MADE THE
CONFESSION NOVEMBER 9th.
NORTH KOREA MEDIA REPORTED H
SIGNED A FOUR-PAGE STATEMENT
CONFESSING TO HIS CRIMES, BU
ITS AUTHENTICITY WAS CAST IN
DOWN WITH PHRASES LIKE "I WANT
NOT PUNISH ME.
THERE WERE HIGH LEVEL TALK
BETWEEN PAKISTAN AND AFGHANISTAN
AIMED AT BRINGING PEACE TO THE
REGION
THE PAKISTANI PRIME MINISTER
TRAVELED TO KABUL WITH MEETING
WITH AFGHAN PRESIDENT HAMI
KARZAI
THEY REACHED AN AGREEMENT FO
MEMBERS OF AN AFGHAN PEACE
COUNCIL TO CONTINUE NEGOTIATIONS
WITH A HIGH-LEVEL PAKISTAN
TALIBAN LEADER RECENTLY RELEASED
FROM PRISON.
THOSE TALKS BEGAN IN THE PAS
FEW DAYS
>>> THE U.S. OFFERED TO DESTRO
SOME OF SYRIA'S MOST LETHA
CHEMICAL WEAPONS OFFSHORE.
PROBABLY ON A SHIP IN TH
MEDITERRANEAN SEA.
THE PLAN IS TO PACKAGE AND
TRANSPORT THE WEAPONS FROM
SEVERAL SITES WITHIN SYRIA T
THE NATION'S LARGEST PORT THEN
LOAD THEM ON TO SHIPS.
THE WEAPONS ARE TO BE REMOVE
FROM SYRIA BY THE END OF THE
YEAR
ALL THIS HAS TO BE ACCOMPLISHE
EVEN AS THE CIVIL WAR RAGES ON
IN SYRIA
>>> IN THE UKRAINE, THOUSANDS OF
ANTI-GOVERNMENT DEMONSTRATOR
TURNED OUT AGAIN TODAY AND SOM
OPPOSITION LEADERS CALLED FO
NATIONWIDE STRIKES AFTER A NIGHT
OF BLOODY CLASHES BETWEE
PROTESTERS AND POLICE.
THE PROTESTS WERE PROMPTED B
THE PRESIDENT'S REFUSAL TO SIG
A DEAL SUPPORTED IN PUBLIC
OPINION POLLS THAT WOULD
INTEGRATE UKRAINE INTO THE
EUROPEAN UNION, SOMETHING RUSSIA
IS STRONGLY AGAINST.
>>> HEAVYWEIGHT BOXING CHAMPION,
A LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION PARTY
EXPRESSED HIS SUPPORT FOR TH
DEMONSTRATORS.
>> Translator: WHAT COUNTRY DO
YOU WANT TO LIVE IN?
A TOTALALITARIAN COUNTRY WHERE
YOUR CHILDREN ARE BEAT UP?
>> P THE ANNUAL GENERAL SOCIAL
SURVEY CON DUCKED SINCE TH
EARLY '70s WITH THE HELP OF TH
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATIO
FINDS THAT 2/3 OF AMERICANS HAVE
LITTLE CONFIDENCE IN THE PEOPL
WHO SWIPE THEIR CREDIT OR DEBI
CARDS WHEN THEY BUY SOMETHING.
ABOUT HALF OF ALL AMERICANS SA
THEY DON'T REALLY TRUST TH
PEOPLE WHO DO WORK IN THEI
HOMES, PEOPLE WHO PREPARE THEI
FOOD AT RESTAURANTS OR THE
PEOPLE IN DOCTORS' OFFICES AND
HOSPITALS WHO HAVE ACCESS TO
THEIR MEDICAL RECORDS.
>>> YOU MIGHT NOT HAVE BEE
PAYING ASESSIONALLY CLOS
ATTENTION TO THE NEWS THE PAST
COUPLE OF DAYS
YOU MIGHT HAVE MISSED WHAT MAN
BELIEVE WAS A SERIOUS ESCALATION
OF TENSIONS IN THE PACIFIC
BETWEEN SOME OF THE WORLD GREA
POWERS
CHINA ON ONE SIDE AND THE JAPA
AND THE UNITED STATES ON THE
OTHER.
IT'S ALL ABOUT A DISPUTE BETWEEN
JAPAN AND CHINA OVER CONTROL O
FIVE VERY SMALL ISLANDS IN THE
EAST CHINA SEA
THE STORY IS ESPECIALLY RELEVANT
FOR AMERICAN VIEWERS BECAUSE THE
ISLANDS ARE ADMINISTERED B
JAPAN.
UNDER A TREATY, THE UNITED
STATES IS OBLIGATED TO DEFEN
JAPAN AGAINST ANY ATTACK O
TERRITORY IT ADMINISTERS
FOR MORE WE ARE JOINED BY JOHN
BUSY, ASSISTANT MANAGING EDITO
OF THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL.
EARLIER HE WAS THE NEWSPAPER'S
FOREIGN EDITOR AND BEFORE THAT
ITS TOKYO CORRESPONDENT.
WHY DO THESE FIVE ISLANDS MATTER
SO MUCH TO CHINA AND JAPAN
>> THEY ARE IN THE EAST CHIN
SEA, BUT THEY HAVE UNKNOWN OIL
AND GAS DEPOSITS BENEATH THEM.
THEY ARE KIND OF THE GOVERNING
TRADE ROUTES FOR WHOEVER HAS
AUTHORITY OVER THEM.
THEY ARE KIND OF SIGNIFICANT
FROM A GEOGRAPHICAL STANDPOINT
AND ENERGY STANDPOINT.
AND EMOTIONAL STANDPOINT FOR
BOTH OF THESE COUNTRIES.
CHINA SAYS THEY ARE WAY TOO FA
FROM JAPAN TO REALLY BE PART O
JAPAN.
JAPAN SAYS, LOOK, WE
ADMINISTERED THEM FOR DECADES,
THEY'RE OURS
>> WHAT'S THE LATEST IN THIS
ROUND OF ESCALATION THAT'S BEE
HAPPENING?
CHINA SENT FIGHTER JETS TO MAK
SURE THE JAPANESE AND U.S. JET
IN THAT AIR SPACE AREN'T GOING
THERE?
>> JAPAN HAS BEEN ADMINISTERIN
THE ISLANDS.
CHINA SAID THEY CLAIM THEM A
THEIR OWN.
WHAT CHINA HAS DONE IS IT HA
DECLARED A DEFENSE
IDENTIFICATION ZONE THAT
INCORPORATES THE ISLANDS
ESSENTIALLY INTO THE SECURITY OF
CHINA.
ANYBODY WHO FLIES THROUGH THER
MUST SUBMIT A FLIGHT PAT
AGREEMENT TO CHINA
THEY MUST ALSO IDENTIF
THEMSELVES WELL IN ADVANCE AND
THEY MUST DO WHATEVER CHINA SAYS
THEY MUST DO IN THE AIR.
IF YOU'RE FLYING IN AND THEY SAY
TAKE A LEFT, YOU TAKE A LEFT
U.S. SAYS NO WAY
THEY FLEW B-52s WITHOU
SIGNALING THEY WOULD DO THAT
JAPAN HAS DONE THE SAME THING,
SOUTH KOREA HAS DONE THE SAM
THING.
COMMERCIAL CARRIERS ARE BEIN
MORE CAUTIOUS.
SOME IN ASIA STARTED SUBMITTIN
THEIR FLIGHT PLANS TO CHINA,
EVEN THOUGH THAT'S SEEN BY THE
NATIONAL GOVERNMENTS A
KOWTOWING TO THE CHINESE
DEMANDS.
>> ARE THEY GIVING THE FLIGH
PLANS TO CHINA AS IF IT'
ALREADY THEIR TERRITORY?
>> YESTERDAY THE UNITED STATES
ADVISED THE CARRIERS TO PROVID
FLIGHT PLANS
THE USA WANTS TO AVOID ANY
POSSIBLE ESCALATION THAT LEADS
TO A MISTAKE
IF CHINA SCRAMBLING JETS TO TA
ALONG WITH MILITARY PLANES
WANDERING THROUGH THE ZONE, THIS
IS A HEAVILY TRAFFICKED AREA
YOU ARE GOING FROM HONG KONG T
JAPAN, YOU'RE GOING TO FLY
THROUGH IT
ALL THESE INTERNATIONAL FLIGHT
AND REGIONAL FLIGHTS HAVE TO G
THROUGH IT
WHAT THE U.S. DOESN'T WANT T
HAVE HAPPEN IS FOR THERE TO BE A
MISTAKE.
THERE HAVE BEEN MISTAKES IN TH
PAST WHERE CHINESE FIGHTER JET
OF 2001 HIT A U.S. SURVEILLANC
AIRCRAFT, SUPPOSEDLY I
INTERNATIONAL AIR SPACE AN
CHINESE SAID YOU'RE TOO CLOSE TO
OUR COAST.
>> VICE PRESIDENT BIDEN HEADIN
TO THE REGION.
WHAT DOES THE OBAM
ADMINISTRATION SAY ABOUT ALL
THIS
>> U.S. SAID THIS IS
UNACCEPTABLE
YOU'RE BEING WAY TOO
PROVOCATIVE, ESCALATING TENSIONS
IN THE REGION.
FOR CHINA, THEY ARE PLAYING INTO
JAPAN'S HANDS BECAUSE JAPA
WANTS TO STRENGTHEN IT
MILITARY, WANTS TO CHANGE IT
CONSTITUTION
IS SEEKING DOMESTIC SUPPORT FO
THAT
THIS IS GOING TO CREATE MORE
DOMESTIC SUPPORT FOR THAT.
IT'S GOING TO ALIENATE CHINA
FROM ITS REGIONAL ROLE AND THE
STRENGTH IT WANTED TO PROJECT TO
ITS NEIGHBORS AND FRIENDLINESS
IT WANTED TO PROJECT
IT'S GOING TO ENHANCE THE U.S.
POSITION IN THE REGION AS AN
ALTERNATIVE TO CHINA
I THINK A LOT OF THESE COUNTRIES
ARE GOING TO BE VERY HAPPY THA
THE U.S. HAS A PRESENCE IN ASIA.
>> WHAT ARE THE RISKS HERE O
ALL THE SABER RATTLING
>> AN ESCALATION YOU DON'T
EXPECT
IF YOU'RE LOOKING AT THE BLOGS
IN CHINA, THERE'S A GREAT DEAL
OF THE INHERENT NATIONALISM THAT
CHINA IS FEELING BECAUSE OF IT
SUBSTANTIAL ECONOMIC SUCCESS
OVER THE LAST 30 YEARS
REFLECTED IN INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS.
BLOGGERS ARE SAYING GET THOS
FLIGHTS OUT OF THERE, GET TH
B-52s OUT OF THERE
CHINESE ARE PLAYING TO A
NATIONALISTIC DOMESTIC AUDIENCE,
TRYING TO PLAY WITH TH
INTERNATIONAL AUDIENCE AND SEE
FLEXIBLE
IF THEIR FIGHTER JETS ARE IN THE
AIR AND THEY ARE DOGGING EAC
OTHER THAT, COULD BE A MISTAKE
THAT IS WHAT U.S. AND JAPAN AR
CONCERNED ABOUT.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH
>> PLEASURE.
>>> NOW TO A TOWN ON THE
FRONTIERS OF THE UNITED STATES
WHICH IS ALSO ONE OF THE FIRST
TO FEEL THE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE
CHANGE
EVEN AS RESIDENTS OF BARROW,
ALASKA, COPE WITH CHANGING
WEATHER PATTERNS AND MELTING SEA
ICE, MANY ARE DETERMINED TO KEEP
THEIR TRADITIONAL WAY OF LIFE.
APRIL BROWN BRINGS US THIS
REPORT WHICH ORIGINALLY AIRED ON
THE WEEKDAY BROADCAST, PART OF A
"NEWSHOUR" SERIES CALLED "ARTI
THAW."
>> Reporter: IT'S A DAY OF
FISHING FOR THE BROTHERS
THEY ARE CHECKING ON NETS THEY
SET NEAR POINT BARROW 300 MILE
ABOVE THE ARCTIC CIRCLE.
TODAY'S CATCH IS SEEN AS A
MODERATE SUCCESS
THE BROTHERS WERE BORN AND
RAISED IN NEARBY BARROW, ALASKA.
ONE OF EIGHT VILLAGES IN THE
NORTH SLOPE BOROUGH, AN AREA
THAT SPRAWLED OVER 90,000 SQUARE
FILES AND MOST OF THE YEAR CAN
BE REACHED BY PLANE OR DEPENDING
ON THE SEA ICE, SHIP
NEARLY 90,000 PEOPLE CALL BARROW
HOME
NEARLY HALF OF NATIVE ESKIMOS.
TODAY IS SIMPLY ANOTHER DAY AT
THE OFFICE
THEY'RE IN SEARCH OF WALRUS AN
SEALS.
WHEN THE SEASON IS RIGHT THEY GO
FOR THE BIGGEST PRIZE OF THE
ALL, BOWHEAD WHALES.
THE MARINE MAMMAL HAS BEEN AT AT
CENTER OF THEIR CULTURE FO
GENERATIONS.
THE CATCH WILL BE SHARED LATER
WITH FAMILY AND FRIENDS.
>> I GUESS YOU COULD SAY IT'S
CERTAIN STANDING WITHIN YOUR
COMMUNITY.
YOU PROVIDE FOR YOUR COMMUNITY
YOU ASSIST OTHERS WITH PROVIDING
FOR YOUR COMMUNITY
IT'S LIKE A JOB.
YOU HAVE A JOB AND YOU NEE
WORKERS.
WHILE YOU CATCH A WALRUS O
WHALE OR SEAL, THEY DON'T GE
PAID WITH MONEY.
THEY GET PAID WITH THE SHARE
FROM THESE ANIMALS
IT'S A GREAT BOUNTY.
>> Reporter: IT'S PART OF
SUBSISTIANS TRADITION HANDED
AROUND FOR CENTURIES INCLUDING
LAND ANIMALS AND BIRDS, AS WELL.
>> THIS IS OUR GARDEN, OUR
GROCERY STORE, YOU KNOW.
YOU CAN PRETTY MUCH LIVE OFF THE
LAND
>> Reporter: THIS LIFESTYLE CA
BE TRACED BACK TO 400 A.D. WHE
THE FIRST HUMANS SETTLED AROUN
PRESENT DAY BARROW, BUT MICHAE
DONOVAN WORRIES BECAUSE OF
RISING TEMPERATURES AND MELTIN
SEA ICE, FUTURE GENERATIONS MA
NOT BE ABLE TO LIVE THIS WAY
>> IT'S DEFINITELY CHANGING
LOT.
IT'S KIND OF HARD TO SAY IF OU
YOUNGER GENERATIONS WILL BE ABLE
TO DO WHAT WE DO
>> Reporter: DONOVAN GREW UP I
BARROW
HE USES HIS LOCAL KNOWLEDGE TO
HELP WITH LOGISTICS AND ACTS A
A POLAR BEAR GUARD FOR A COMPANY
THAT PROVIDES SEAL SUPPORT FOR
SCIENTISTS WORKING IN THE AREA
AMONG THEM, IGNATIUS RIGGER.
HE'S IN BARROW TO CHECK ON BUOYS
THAT MEASURE SURFACE AIR
TEMPERATURE AND AIR PRESSURE
LIKE MANY SCIENTISTS, HE HAS
BEEN COMING TO THE ARCTIC FO
YEARS.
>> THIS IS THE FRONT LINE OF
GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE.
BASICALLY BEFORE THE PLANET CA
HEAT UP, YOU HAVE TO, JUST LIK
A GLASS OF WATER, BEFORE IT CA
GET WARM, YOU HAVE TO GET RID OF
THE ICE.
WE ARE SEEING THE ICE DISAPPEAR.
AND WE ARE SEEING THAT ARCTI
OCEAN START TO WARM UP
>>
>> Reporter: AVERAGE WINTE
TEMPERATURES HAVE RISEN SHARPL
OVER THE PAST FEW DECADES AN
RIGGER, AN EXPERT ON SEA ICE
SAYS THE RESULT HAS HAD MAJO
CONSEQUENCES
>> THIS ICE IS MELTING AWA
DRAMATICALLY
EACH SUMMER WE LOST MORE THA
HALF OF THE ICE COVER WE
TYPICALLY HAVE
WE ALSO LOST A LOT OF TH
THICKNESS OF SEA ICE
SO TAKEN TOGETHER, THE TOTAL
VOLUME OF SEA ICE IS DOWN LESS
THAN 40% OF WHAT IT USED TO BE
>> Reporter: FOR CENTURIES
WHAT'S KNOWN AS MULTIYEAR ICE OR
THE ACCUMULATION OF SEA ICE FROM
ONE YEAR TO THE NEXT, HAS BEEN
CRUCIAL TO LIFE HERE
IT PROVIDES WHALING CAPTAINS
LIKE HARRY BROWER THE PEACE OF
MIND TO KNOW THEY CAN STAND ON
THE THICK ICE HUNTING WHALES
SOMETHING THEY HAVE SPECIA
PERMISSION TO DO
IN THE PAST FEW YEARS, BROWE
SAYS HE'S SEEN MOSTLY STRETCHE
OF SMALL SHALLOW ICE THAT AR
EXTREMELY DANGEROUS FOR HUNTERS.
AND BECAUSE OF THE CONDITIONS,
THE COMMUNITY HAS STRUGGLED TO
REACH ITS ANNUAL QUOTA
>> LAST SPRING WAS VERY POOR
WE DIDN'T EVEN HARVEST ONE FOR
BARROW THROUGHOUT THE WHOL
MIGRATORY SEASON
>> Reporter: POOR WHALIN
SEASONS ALSO HURT OTHE
COMMUNITIES ALONG THE NORT
SLOPE WHERE THE COST OF LIVING
IS ROUGHLY 275% HIGHER THAN IT
IS FOR AMERICANS IN THE LOWE
RESIDENTS ROUTINELY PAY MORE
THAN $10 FOR A GALLON OF MILK.
>> IT BECOMES A FOOD SHORTAGE IN
A SENSE, IF YOU THINK ABOUT ON
WHALE PROVIDING FOR A WHOL
COMMUNITY.
>> THIS IS PROBABLY TH
COLLAPSED ROOF OF THE STRUCTURE.
>> Reporter: THIS ARCTIC
ARCHAEOLOGIST POINTS TO ANOTHE
CONSEQUENCE OF SEA ICE MELTING
COASTAL EROSION.
SEA ICE OFFERS BARROW'S SHOR
PROTECTION
NOW THAT IT'S STARTING T
DISAPPEAR, WAVES HAVE BEGU
WASHING AWAY ARTIFACTS THOUSANDS
OF YEARS OLD TAKING AWAY A PAS
THAT COULD PROVIDE CLUES FOR THE
FUTURE
>> WE NOT ONLY LOSE INFORMATIO
ABOUT PEOPLE'S HERITAGE AND TH
PAST, BUT IF YOU HAVE A SITE
LAYERS, YOU CAN SEE HOW THINGS
CHANGE THROUGH TIME, HOW
PEOPLE'S SUBSISTENCE CHANGE.
IT'S LIKE BURNING LIBRARIES.
>> Reporter: EVEN THOUGH THE
MELTING SEA ICE IS CHANGINGWAY
RESIDENTS GO ABOUT TRADITIONS,
IT'S BRINGING ECONOMIC
OPPORTUNITIES.
SEA ROUTES ONCE BLOCKED BY
LAYERS OF IMPENETRABLE ICE HAV
BEGUN OPENING AND MANY
CORPORATIONS ARE EYEING WAYS T
PUSH FURTHER INTO TH
RESOURCE-RICH ARCTIC
OIL AND GAS COMPANIES OPERATIN
IN THE REGION PAY TAXES THAT
FINANCE THE $350 MILLION ANNUA
BUDGET
>> WITHOUT THAT SUPPORT IN
INDUSTRY, WE WON'T HAV
ANYTHING
OUR PEOPLE GOT TO HAVE JOBS.
>> Reporter: ANTHONY EDWARDSON
IS THE PRESIDENT OF
CORPORATION THAT PROMOTE
ECONOMIC GROWTH IN THE NORTH
SLOPE.
OIL WAS DISCOVERED IN NEARBY
PRUDO BAY IN THE 1960s AND
TRANSFORMED AN AREA THAT AT TH
TIME WAS LARGELY WITHOUT
ELECTRICITY, RUNNING WATER AND
MODERN SCHOOLS
>> I FIRMLY BELIEVE WHEN YOU
COME TO THE END WE BENEFIT
AS LONG AS IT'S DIVIDED AMON
US, EQUAL WAY.
>> Reporter: TODAY THE NORTH
SLOPE PRODUCES AS MUCH AS 1/5 OF
THE NATION'S OIL
IGNATIUS RIGGER SAYS THEY REMAIN
DIVIDED ON FURTHER OFFSHOR
DEVELOPMENT THAT COULD THREATE
THEIR TRADITIONAL LIFESTYLE.
>> THE LOCAL POPULATIONS ARE
TORN BECAUSE THEY REALIZE THAT
THERE IS A BOUNTY OFF THEI
COAST THAT COULD REALLY IMPROV
THEIR LIFESTYLE, BUT THIS BOUNTY
IS ALSO COULD BE CATASTROPHI
FOR THEIR WAY OF LIFE.
IF AN ACCIDENT HAPPENS, YO
KNOW, THERE GOES SUBSISTENCE
HUNTING AND WHALING.
>> Reporter: MIKE DONOVAN SAYS
IF THE CHOICE WERE UP TO HIM, IT
WOULD BE AN EASY ONE
>> EVEN IF THEY PAID ME $100
MILLION, I WOULDN'T CHANGE THA
LIFESTYLE FOR ANYTHING IN TH
WORLD.
>> Reporter: THE PEOPLE AR
LIKELY TO FACE A RANGE O
CLIMATE DECISIONS AS THE ARCTI
IS WARMING TWICE AS FAST AS AN
PLACE ON THE PLANET.
>>> FOR MORE FROM THE ARCTIC
HOW A PEA-SIZED SNAIL IS BEING
CHANGED BY OCEAN CHEMISTRY AND
COMPLICATIONS SURROUNDING OI
EXPLORATION IN THE REGION, VISIT
NEWSHOUR.PBS.ORG
>>> JOIN US TOMORROW ON AIR AN
ONLINE
WHAT HAPPENS BEFORE AND DURING
AND AFTER BATTLE
IMAGES OF ARMED CONFLICT
JEFFREY BROWN REPORTS.
>> THEN THERE ARE PICTURES THA
FEATURE AN INDIVIDUAL AND YO
GRIEVE FOR THAT INDIVIDUAL
OR YOU WONDER WHAT HAPPENED TO
THEM
>> THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITIO
OF "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING